# S3

 [Source](https://www.javacodegeeks.com/2017/03/amazon-s3-tutorial.html)	

EDITORIAL NOTE: Amazon S3 (Simple Storage Service) is a web service offered by Amazon Web Services. Amazon S3 provides storage through web services interfaces (REST, SOAP, and BitTorrent).

Amazon does not make details of S3’s design public, though it clearly manages data with an object storage architecture. According to Amazon, S3’s design aims to provide scalability, high availability, and low latency at commodity costs.

S3 is designed to provide 99.999999999% durability and 99.99% availability of objects over a given year, though there is no service-level agreement for durability. (Source: Wikipedia)

Now, we provide a comprehensive guide so that you can develop your own Amazon S3 based applications. We cover a wide range of topics, from setup and configuration, to API usage and pricing. With this guide, you will be able to get your own projects up and running in minimum time. Enjoy!

# Introduction

While Amazon’s web shop grew over the years, the need for a scalable IT infrastructure became more urgent from day to day. This let Amazon create its own service based infrastructure. On the search for new business models, Amazon was one of the first pioneers to offer the services build for their own business also to customers.

Amazon S3 is therefore a storage service that is designed to store “any amount of data at any time anywhere on the web”. It offers a simple to use web service interface that can be used by application developers for different use case. Projects can store their webpage on Amazon S3 as well as artifacts needed by their application. Beyond that applications may store use data in S3. Amazon also integrates the storage service into other services, hence it is possible to use the data stored in S3 also for analytical investigations or face recognition.

