# Aws Elastic Beanstalk CLI Instalation
_August 9, 2019_


The EB CLI is a command line interface for Elastic Beanstalk that simplify creating, updating and monitoring environments. 
The EB CLI can be used as an alternative to the AWS Management Console.


# Installation


I am using pyenv to manage my python environment. 
Automated script to install EB CLI using the Bundler Installer won't work in the pyenv virtual environment. 
Manual installation of awsebcli is necessary.


```bash
	pyenv activate ve37aws
	git clone https://github.com/aws/aws-elastic-beanstalk-cli-setup.git
	pip install awsebcli --upgrade
	eb --help
	which eb
```

The --upgrade option tells pip to upgrade any requirements that are already installed. 
The --user option tells pip to install the program to a subdirectory of your user directory to avoid modifying libraries that your operating system uses.


# Configuration


The EB CLI looks for the AWS credentials in a number of different places. 
- **Command line options** – Specify a named profile by using --profile to override default settings.
- **Environment variables** – AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID and AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY.
- **The AWS credentials file** – located at ~/.aws/credentials . It contains multiple named profiles in addition to a default profile.
- **The AWS CLI configuration file** – located at ~/.aws/config . It contains a default profile, named profiles, and AWS CLI–specific configuration parameter.





## References

- [eb-cli-installation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/elasticbeanstalk/latest/dg/eb-cli3.html)

GoTo > [Top](#the-journey-is-the-reward) 
